---
title: About the Project
permalink: /about/
layout: page
---

## The Translation

<p class="lead">This is the first-ever complete translation of *Apadāna* into a Western
language. It has been a daunting undertaking, traversing the
translator’s entirely professional career, yet it admittedly remains an
imperfect work in progress. Motivated by a sense that scholars,
students, Buddhists and even the general public might enjoy and benefit
from access to this beautiful collection of ancient poetry, he has
pushed ahead, in fits and starts, to produce the present translation,
and to offer it for free to the world in this innovative online format.</p>

At times, the problems seemed insurmountable. Because the Pali Text
Society edition, produced by an obscure Miss Mary E. Lilley during the
1920s, is notoriously corrupt among the generally-reliable products of
that august organization (which probably accounts for the fact that it
is the sole narrative text of the Pāli Canon hitherto untranslated), the
translator was led to better editions in Sinhala, Burmese, Thai and
Devanagari scripts. But these turned out to vary among themselves
significantly enough that no single one of them could be relied upon
consistently. While the translator has not produced a new, critical
edition of his own, he has attempted to redress this problem by using
multiple editions, side-by-side. In particular, this is a translation of
*both* the Pali Text Society (PTS) Roman-script edition,[^1] which is
most widely available in the West, *and* of the Buddha Jayanthi
Tripitaka Series (BJTS) Sinhala-script edition,[^2] which is most widely
available in Sri Lanka. In practice, the translation follows the PTS
edition wherever possible, but does not shy away from translating the
BJTS edition instead, in places where it corrects mistakes in the PTS
edition, includes material not found in the PTS edition, or offers
significantly more plausible readings of obscure passages. The BJTS
edition includes an invaluable Sinhala gloss on each verse, which has
often been followed in translating such obscure passages. Each of these
cases is marked with a side note detailing the decision to follow BJTS
rather than PTS, which provides the alternate PTS reading for interested
readers.

Translating both editions at once thus necessitated extensive side notes
to mark significant differences between the two editions, as well as the
cumbersome inclusion of the poem and verse numbers which correspond to
each edition (but not always to each other). Similar scholarly
conventions — such as the consistent transliteration of Pāli terms and
names with standard diacritical markings, the use of square brackets to
indicate interpolations made by the translator, and additional,
explanatory side notes — will hopefully likewise be of use to scholars,
especially those who use the translation (as they should) merely as a
“pony” for reading the original Pāli. But this scholarly apparatus
nevertheless further encumbers the presentation of the translation to
those who, conversely, wish to read it, or (as they should) recite it,
for the pleasure of the text itself. With the able assistance of Dana
Johnson at Sloop Creative, the translator has attempted to redress this
problem by making these various aspects of the scholarly apparatus
toggle-able. Those who want to track individual poems or verses in the
original Pāli, or who want to consider variant readings, or who want to
distinguish what is original to the text from what has been added by the
translator for clarity and meter, or who care to see the original Pāli
of technical terms or unusual grammatical formulations, will be able to
do so, by toggling on those various dimensions of the scholarly
apparatus. But those who want to just read the poems as poems can do so
as well, by toggling all that off.

A third problem faced by the translator grew out of his sense that the
form as well as the content of the original must needs be communicated
in the translation. These legends were composed as poems, meant for
recitation, and in numerous cases it is clear that the original authors
were willing to sacrifice grammar, or to throw in filler words, *metri
causa*. To translate the content in prose, even if it included the
various stylistic ornaments of the original, would fail to convey the
fluid, rhythmic beauty which helped make this text so compelling in its
day. But the ultimate decision to translate into English verse was a
hard one, both because English lacks the flexibility that allowed the
Pāli authors to exercise their literary muscles, and because translation
(even of poetry) into prose has become something of a convention in
Buddhist Studies (which thereby inevitably sacrifices form for content).
There are certainly some fine models for translation of Buddhist poetry
into verse, such as the early translations of *Theragāthā* and
*Therīgāthā* into English verse by Mrs. C. A. F. Rhys Davids, and the
more recent ones by Prof. Charles Hallisey, but these translators have
adopted the poetic conventions of their own day, rather than those of
the text itself. For readers of Tennyson or Ginsberg the Lockesley-Hall
meter of Mrs. Rhys Davids, or the free verse of Prof. Hallisey,
respectively, really “work” as poetry…but those texts, like *Apadāna*
(to which they are in fact closely related), are composed in neither
ornate Victorian nor crisp modernist idioms; they are composed in
*gāthās* containing four, eight-syllable lines each. The present
translator thus decided neither to translate into prose, nor to
translate into a contemporary poetic idiom, but rather to imitate the
actual structure of the Pāli; each verse in the following translation is
structured by the lines and syllable counts of the original. The result,
it is hoped, is a translation which accurately conveys both the meaning
and the cadence of the Pāli original. To achieve this in English has
required considerable poetic license, to be sure; but as indicated
above, every effort has been made to mark diversions from the original
through a combination of side notes and square brackets.

While the on-line format was chosen primarily for its ability to provide
“scholarly” and “lite” (or “Kindle”) versions simultaneously, in order
to meet the needs of the different audiences that might make use of this
translation, it proved to be the solution to other, additional problems
as well. Thus the problem faced by all authors, that the text is never
perfect, is mitigated by the fact that, unlike a traditional printed
book, digital publication allows for easy on-going editing. The
translation is thus put forward sooner than would have been possible
were this to be the once-and-final version, with the proviso that it is,
again, a work in progress. The translator will continue to edit the text
for years to come, and invites reader criticism (through a Wiki
function? talk with Dana about this?) to assist in making this a better,
if never truly perfect, translation. Additionally, because the
collection is so massive, a traditional printed book would be
prohibitively expensive, and would require a whole forest worth of
paper. The digital format allows the translator to distribute the
translation universally, for free, which he hopes, among other things,
will encourage colleagues to put it (or selected portions of it) into
the hands of their students. Toward this end, users will find links to
easily download a PDF of any individual poem, or an e-book of the entire
text. Likewise, the translator anticipates several additional digital
innovations, forthcoming, which will further enhance the intended effect
of the translation, including a soundtrack so that the text can be
listened to rather than read (as originally was certainly the case),
pictures of statues and paintings of the individual monks and nuns such
as they can be located, and visual glossary entries that illustrate the
many types of trees, uniquely Indian architectural features, and so
forth which are referred to throughout the text.

## The Website
Evam me sutam. Tathatipi me no. Nevayam loko antava, na panananto. Tathatipi me no, annathatipi me no, notipi me no, no notipi me no'ti. Ye kho te bhonto deva na manopadosika, te nativelam annamannam upanijjhayanti. Yatha va paneke bhonto samanabrahmana saddhadeyyani. Sanghassa va vannam bhaseyyum, tatra tumhehi bhutam bhutato patijanitabbam. Tepi tattha honti manomaya pitibhakkha sayampabha antalikkhacara subhatthayino, ciram dighamaddhanam titthanti. Idam, bhikkhave, dutiyam thanam, yam agamma yam arabbha eke samanabrahmana.

Tatra, bhikkhave, ye te samanabrahmana ditthadhammanibbanavada sato sattassa paramaditthadhammanibbanam pannapenti pancahi vatthuhi. Tatrapasim evamnamo evamgotto evamvanno evamaharo evamsukhadukkhappatisamvedi evamayupariyanto, so tato cuto idhupapannoti.

Abbhantaranam rannam parajayo bhavissati, iti imassa jayo bhavissati. Imassa parajayo bhavissati iti va iti evarupaya tiracchanavijjaya micchajiva pativirato samano gotamo'ti. Idam, bhikkhave, catuttham thanam, yam agamma yam arabbha eke samanabrahmana ekaccasassatika.

Ekodibhavam avitakkam avicaram samadhijam pitisukham dutiyam jhanam upasampajja viharati. Nevayam loko antava, na panananto. Phusati, yathasamahite citte anekavihitam pubbenivasam anussarati. Tatra, bhikkhave, ye te samanabrahmana ditthadhammanibbanavada sato sattassa.

[^1]: Mary E. Lilley, ed., *The Apadāna of the Khuddaka Nikāya* (London:
    Pali Text Society, 1925 \[Part One\] and 1927 \[Part Two\]).

[^2]: Ven. Pandita Talallē Dhammananda Sthavirayan Vahansē, ed.,
    *Sūtrāntapiṭakayehi Tisväni Granthaya Apadānapāḷi, Part One*
    (Government of Ceylon Press, 1961); Ven. Pandita Talallē Dhammananda
    Sthavirayan Vahansē, ed., *Sūtrāntapiṭakayehi Ekatisväni Granthaya
    Apadānapāḷi, Part Two, Volume One* (Government of Ceylon Press,
    1977); Ven. Pandita Weṇḍaruwē Siri Anomadassi Sthavirayan Vahansē,
    ed., *Sūtrāntapiṭakayehi Ekatisväni Granthaya Apadānapāḷi, Part Two,
    Volume Two* (Democratic Socialist Republican Government of Sri Lanka
    Press, 1983).
